I get email especially often from people
that want advice about vegan activism
I'm more than 1,000 videos deep on this
YouTube channel I'm gonna recommend an
hour-long video that I recorded more
than three years ago you see little
image of it here with Adrian Adrian who
I still know to this day who I'm meeting
with in Toronto within the next few days
and obviously for her three years three
years must feel like a longer time for
her at her age then who felt from me at
my age but nevertheless she's one of the
many people who've written into me and
spoken to me by Skype asking for advice
wanting to discuss or debate what is
effective activism what should we do as
activists and I'm gonna respond to this
message from patreon supporter named
Lance who's asking many of the same
questions that I've answered before but
I've gotten older as the years have gone
by and my answer is a little bit
different from before my fundamental
guidance for Lance is to say when you
look at activism you have to look at the
fundamental process and the fundamental
product as being who you are the
cultivation of your own character so
Lance writes in saying hello I am a new
patreon supporter and decided to become
one in hopes of improving my activism I
already do a variety of different types
of activism such as tabling at different
events doing free vegan food giveaways
trying to get into giving speeches and
I'm also an AV organizer although we may
disagree on this type of action just to
pause for one second if you don't know
the term tbling if you're not used to
seeing the word table as a verb instead
of as a noun that is a bit of a term of
art in politics I guess where people set
up a table there may be buttons and
cupcakes and pamphlets and posters and
scarves on the table there may be
selling hats but we're fundamentally
they stand behind a table and let people
who are interested approach them and ask
for more information as opposed to going
out and confronting people so yeah that
is many many different political
movements and even religious movements
to tabeling and tabling it's often a
very effective method of fundraising
people will come up and donate money to
a table I see this with taking care of
stray dogs organizations they do a lot
of tabling where they put up a poster
saying they help stray dogs and then
they just stand there
and people walk up and give them money I
mean that case it's mostly not even
educational average so interesting
tabling works for some types of causes
and not for others but it is much less
confrontational than what we're
accustomed to under the name of vegan
activism all right so he continues I am
very interested in trying to find new
ways of being an effective activist and
looking for any suggestions you may have
or even some book recommendations from a
steer me in the right direction I am in
each D mechanic at a Mills this is some
kind of mechanic I don't think about it
so I don't really have a trade that
translates well to Pekin activism but
I'm fairly knowledgeable in nutrition
fitness and a very practice intubating
veganism but a very little knowledge of
politics or philosophy he lives in a
smaller city in Canada but he does have
a group of ten to twelve people as an
activist ooh okay now before I get to
your question Lance before I lay into
this in any depth
I'm gonna read another comment I
received from a viewer oh here's a
viewer writing in from Madrid Spain who
says your green party experience
resonates with me here in Madrid vegans
are probably most visible during animal
issue street marches you could say they
have a uniform many are either a New Age
vagabond attire beautiful beautiful
choice of words
New Age vagabond that captures the image
perfectly New Age vagabond attire or in
anarchist punk black clothing piercings
and tattoos people who appear
quote-unquote normal appear to be in a
minority in some of these marches some
of the vegan groups here go on about
yoga and pseudo-scientific
alternative treatments the vegans here
who are politically active and who have
some sense in them are indeed a minority
within a minority one must navigate
through a lot of hippies so look guys
it's worthwhile to have a laugh but I
don't think observations of this kind or
a laughing matter I think fundamentally
we all have to recognize the greatest
threat to the future of the vegan
movement is the present of the vegan
movement the greatest obstacle to
organizing activists is the reality of
who those activists are today who are
the early adopters in this movement as
opposed to the people eventually we want
to reach the people whose
talent we want to harness and I think
for anyone including Lance running into
me from patreon I think one of the most
honest things I could say would be that
you're gonna spend a large part of your
time avoiding other vegans you're gonna
spend a lot of your time shutting down
other vegans you're gonna spend a lot of
time blocking other vegans on Facebook
we've all done it
come on you're gonna spend a lot of your
time you know if you go to these events
whether they're conferences with even
academic conferences on university
campuses or street protests you're gonna
stand there and look at these people and
say the future of the movement is not
you these are not the people I should be
putting my time and effort into as I've
said recently if anything these people
discredit me these people discredit the
movement these are exactly the people I
can't work with shouldn't work with
these are exactly the people I need to
avoid so you know now by contrast you
can try going to a meeting of the
conservative party
you can try going to meeting the Liberal
Party or the Labour Party or the
Democrat Party depending on where you're
living and you can look around there and
you can see just how many quote-unquote
normal people there are you could be in
some political movements in some
political context where you feel the
greatest obstacle to you changing the
world and accomplishing your goals is
precisely the normalcy of the normal
people but in the vegan movement we're
at the opposite extreme where the
problem is the paucity of that normality
and just gonna say this really briefly
it's very easy to think of yourself as
someone who's too sophisticated to care
about what's normal it's easy to think
that you look down your nose at your
normality okay
being normal is an effort being normal
is a struggle every family who lives in
a white picket fence in the suburbs who
dis simulates or emulates that kind of
normalcy people who live up to social
standards and mores of what's normal
they work hard to be normal it's not the
default okay to use a simile that is not
too mysterious it's like vanilla ice
cream you may think of vanilla ice cream
as the default flavor making vanilla ice
cream is just as hard it's just as much
work it's just as much of an art as
making strawberry ice cream or banana
ice cream or chocolate ice cream all
right vanilla ice cream ain't easy
it's just different and I completely
recognize that styling your hair into a
mohawk everyday wearing the heavy metal
clanking outfit of punk-rock attire
every day that's also hard work I'm sure
dressing up what growing out dreadlocks
must be a lot of work all the
accoutrement eh vagabond must also be
hard work normalcy is hard work
okay so we turn our attention back to
Lance and his question here all right
Lance writes in and asks what should he
do what could he do with vegan activism
I've already disclosed we're now more
than a thousand videos deep on this
patreon channel we've had many
discussions shooting at the earlier one
with Adrian but you can click through I
have a whole playlist called the brass
tacks playlist there's a lot of advice
there from different angles and in some
cases debates it's also a book reviews
playlist he asked there any books I
recommend I think every single book
review is naked but there there is some
actually in-depth discussion of some of
the most important authors in vegan
activism as a movement probably the most
positive is the hour-long discussion of
the intellectual legacy of Garry
Franchione a that is a book review and
discussion the content but there were
others too and some of that also has
guidance implications for what works and
what doesn't in terms of activism but
here's the moral of the story that you
won't find in any of those books
whatever what you have to think about is
what kind of person are you what kind of
person do you aspire to become you have
to look at your activism past present
and future in question how is this gonna
change me because it is gonna change you
alright
standing out on the sidewalk every day
and having confrontations with people
maybe angrily arguing with strangers
about veganism it changes you it doesn't
just change the way people perceive you
doesn't just change your social values
in this it changes how you feel how you
see the world who you are critics
what about actually going to the going
to the slaughterhouses spending time
inside slaughterhouses spending time
inside SeaWorld or spending time on
fishing boats spending time going to
circuses or going to the places where
they kill puppies or whatever these are
all various custom you know a terrible
example terrible example spending all
your time taking care of rescue chickens
shout-out to my one viewer who will know
exactly ones have I have one view or
talks to me her whole life is now
consumed with cleaning up the poo and
the blood of chickens doing you know
horrible veterinary care for these
chickens they rescue these chickens and
then the chickens spend the rest of the
lives on a farm run by a vegan and
there's all these other things that she
can't be doing it changes how you feel
it changes how you see the world as the
years go by it changes who you are and
each one of those people even someone as
successful as James Aspie whatever form
of activism they chose they have to live
with the awareness of the opportunity
cost what they sacrifice because they
could have been doing something else
they could have been doing something
better so the woman is spending all of
her time on a chicken farm a chicken
sanctuary taking care of chickens she
could be getting a PhD okay James Ashby
could be getting a PhD there are people
who sign up and go to culinary school
and become a pastry chef running a vegan
bakery or a vegan restaurant trying to
promote the cause and now every day
they're in the back of that restaurant
rolling out pastry dough doing
repetitive manual labor and they may
have all kinds of frustration they know
they could have gotten a PhD Oh getting
a pitched he's not the only option each
one of these contrasts James ASPI could
have gotten involved in mainstream
politics he could have honed his ability
to sit down at the table with more of
those normal people try to get himself
into Parliament try to get himself into
City Hall try to influence you know the
political mainstream in some way not
just by wearing veganism on his sleeve
or I should say not by just wearing a
sleeveless t-shirt and promoting
veganism but whether you're spending
your time doing the mindless labor of
baking rolling out dough in a bakery or
the
mindless labor of doing physical
training work and maybe you're thinking
I could have become a fully qualified
nutrition and dietetics expert which is
a very hard scientific degree to get you
actually up to study chemistry organic
chemistry nutritional chemistry and
that's quite boring but you could have
done that instead here you are being a
trainer helping people lose weight they
have today alright and to put a human
face on it you've got most of you guys
know the YouTube channel
ask yourself isaac brown's channel that
guy I feel he's ruined his life I feel
he's ruined his character he came here
on the internet and I'm sure it was
intoxicating and exciting at first his
form of activism is having debates with
mentally disabled political extremists
over the Internet again and again and
again and just over the last three years
I mean I've known him well enough I've
watched him you know at a distance but
thought I'd seen enough I've seen the
way that's changed his character I've
seen the way that's changed who he
really is not just how he acts you know
how he feels
give it three years give it five years
having these these stupid discussions
skinned again it will change who you are
and it will change who you are whether
you experience your form of activism as
denigrating humiliating or if you
experience as an ego trip because I mean
I am sure Isaac asked yourself I'm sure
he's on the world's greatest ego trip
evil is the best thing in the world for
him to sit down and exercise his
intellectual superiority over somebody
with autism spectrum disorder who's a
communist extremists making excuses for
Joseph Stalin and in the past he was
doing he used to hold all these
discussions with neo-nazis coming on and
he gets to sit there and feel that he's
the most intelligent narrative person
the world as is not a formula for
intellectual growth I'm sure at least
for the first couple of years James
asked me must have been on the world's
greatest ego trip you know that he gets
to fly around the world and give
interviews with respectable journalists
and here he is appearing in the
newspaper and at some point for both of
those men I hope at some point the
vacuous nests and the wholeness of the
form of activism they've they've
embarked on really becomes evident to
them everyone I've talked to every
single person I've talked to you who did
Street activism they said to me at some
point they just realized doing this
again and again it's a waste of their
time it's turning them into an
embittered you know wreck of a man or
hollow shell of a woman they saw the
damage it was doing to themselves to who
they are
uh-huh every single one now you know
given my youtube you might say well gee
I know you're talking to a peculiar
subset of vegan activist yeah I am I
talk to vegan activist who know what
they're [ __ ] talking about
I talk to the vegan activists who are
not crazy
and who are willing to engage in
critique of what's going on in the
movement and we're willing to engage in
self-examination self-criticism to try
to learn from those no you're right I
don't talk to stereotypical vegans I
don't talk to the people of who are
dressed like New Age vagabonds with
tattoos and the dreadlocks and the
extensive beards and what have you it's
not who I'm talking to I'm talking to
people who are interested in changing
the world okay but my warning in this
video is if you are seriously committed
to changing the world what you have to
examine first and foremost at every
stage of this process is how you are
changing yourself because the process of
being an activist fundamentally
transforms you and your life and if you
have a circle of 10 or 12 people tendril
people other activists just take the
time as a thought experiment able just
your imagine the central group and
imagine where were they gonna be five
years from now who are they gonna be how
are they gonna change this activism
we're engaged in now you know is it
gonna and bitter them is it gonna kind
of destroy them is it gonna make them
into ego maniacs or if they're gonna be
chuffed with their successes they're
gonna be are they're gonna go mad with
their little little bit of authority
they've gained in the movement or diving
because plenty of examples of that we've
talked about on this channel too where
it's the ego trip take selves motivation
and and then when you look at yourself
because you're the one person you have
the most control over you got to think
okay what kind of person do I want to
become what is it I'm trying to
cultivate in myself and then how am I
going to design a program
activism that lets me become that person
where I'm training myself I'm becoming a
better person to activism
I'm not merely looking at activism as a
form of self-sacrificing public service
because it's not it's not self
advocating alright but I'm looking at
this as part of my own education I'm
looking at this and becoming a better
person in the process of trying to make
the world a better place
[Music]